## Page 1

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
Eric Mitchell 1 Charles Lin 1 Antoine Bosselut 2 Christopher D Manning 1 Chelsea Finn 1
Abstract
Even the largest neural networks make errors, and
once-correct predictions can become invalid as
the world changes. Model editors make local
updates to the behavior of base (pre-trained) mod-
els to inject updated knowledge or correct unde-
sirable behaviors. Existing model editors have
shown promise, but also suffer from insufﬁcient
expressiveness: they struggle to accurately model
an edit’s intended scope (examples affected by
the edit), leading to inaccurate predictions for
test inputs loosely related to the edit, and they
often fail altogether after many edits. As a higher-
capacity alternative, we propose Semi-Parametric
Editing with a Retrieval-Augmented Counterfac-
tual Model (SERAC), which stores edits in an
explicit memory and learns to reason over them to
modulate the base model’s predictions as needed.
To enable more rigorous evaluation of model ed-
itors, we introduce three challenging language
model editing problems based on question an-
swering, fact-checking, and dialogue generation.
We ﬁnd that only SERAC achieves high perfor-
mance on all three problems, consistently out-
performing existing approaches to model editing
by a signiﬁcant margin. Code, data, and addi-
tional project information will be made available
at https://sites.google.com/view/serac-editing.
1. Introduction
Large neural networks, notably language models, are typi-
cally deployed as static artifacts, whose behavior is difﬁcult
to modify during deployment without re-training (Lazaridou
et al., 2021). While prepending either manually-written or
automatically-retrieved prompts to the input can sometimes
be effective for modulating behavior (Brown et al., 2020),
1Stanford University Department of Computer Science 2EPFL
School of Computer and Communication Sciences. Correspon-
dence to: Eric Mitchell<eric.mitchell@cs.stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copy-
right 2022 by the author(s).
[ ; ]
No Rayleigh scattering
Edit Memory
  Is Messi 
at Barça?
x1
test=   Why is 
the sky blue?
x2
test=
Scope classiﬁer
Is HCN poisonous? 
Yes
x2
e=
y2
e=
Who is the UK PM? 
Boris Johnson
x1
e=
y1
e=
x1
test
Base model (frozen)Counterfactual model
…
x2
test
Where does Messi play? 
Paris Saint-Germain
x3
e=
y3
e=
x3
e;y3
e
SERAC
Figure 1. SERAC comprises an edit memory, classiﬁer, and coun-
terfactual model. User-supplied edits are stored directly in the
memory. Post-edit inputsx1
test andx2
test are classiﬁed by whether
the memory contains inputs relevant to processing them. If the
classiﬁer determines a relevant edit example exists, the input and
edit example are passed to the counterfactual model. Otherwise,
the input is simply passed to the base model.
model predictions do not always update to reﬂect the con-
tent of the prompts (Lewis et al., 2020; Paranjape et al.,
2021). However, in order to respond to changes in the world
(e.g., new heads of state or evolving public sentiment on a
particular topic) or correcting for instances of underﬁtting
or overﬁtting the original training data, the ability to quickly
make targeted updates to model behavior after deployment
is desirable. To address this need,model editing is an emerg-
ing area of research that aims to enable fast, data-efﬁcient
updates to a pre-trained base model’s behavior for only a
small region of the domain, without damaging model perfor-
mance on other inputs of interest (Sinitsin et al., 2020; Zhu
et al., 2020; Sotoudeh & Thakur, 2019; De Cao et al., 2021;
Dai et al., 2021; Mitchell et al., 2021; Hase et al., 2021;
Meng et al., 2022).
arXiv:2206.06520v1  [cs.AI]  13 Jun 2022


## Page 2

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
Who is the prime 
minister of the UK?
What club does 
Messi play for?
What continent is 
Everest on? Who is the UK deputy PM?
Where is Boris 
Johnson the PM?
Where did Boris 
Johnson go to 
university?
Edit scopeIn-scopeOut-of-scopeHard in/out-of-scope
Why is the sky blue? 
Who is the PM of 
the UK?
Figure 2. Depiction of the edit scope for edit descriptor WHO IS
THE UK PM? B ORIS JOHNSON in a hypothetical semantic em-
bedding space. Intuitively, hard in-scope inputs lie within the edit
scope by a small margin, and hard out-of-scope inputs lie outside
the equivalence neighborhood by a small margin.
A popular approach to model editing involves learnable
model editors, which are trained to predict updates to the
weights of the base model that ultimately produce the de-
sired change in behavior (Sinitsin et al., 2020; De Cao et al.,
2021; Mitchell et al., 2021; Hase et al., 2021). While these
approaches have shown promise, in line with recent work
(Hase et al., 2021), we ﬁnd that existing methods produce
model updates that fail to discriminate between entailed
and non-entailed facts and cannot handle large numbers of
edits. Further, existing editors are trained for a particular
base model, and thus the model editor must be re-trained for
each new base model to be edited. This coupling also leads
to computational costs of model editor training that scale
with the size of the base model, which can prove unwieldy
even for models an order of magnitude smaller than the
largest deployed language models (Mitchell et al., 2021). In
aggregate, existing model editors still have shortcomings
regarding edit performance, compute efﬁciency, and ulti-
mately practicality. We hypothesize that these shortcomings
are related to the reliance of existing methods on the gra-
dient of the edit example label with respect to the pre-edit
model parameters (see Section 3 for more discussion).
Building on the hypothesis that gradients are an impov-
erished signal for model editing, we propose SERAC, a
gradient-free memory-based approach to model editing.
SERAC ‘wraps’ a black-box base model with an explicit
cache of user-provided edit descriptors (arbitrary utterances
for language models) and a small auxiliary scope classiﬁer
and counterfactual model. Rather than making model edits
in parameter space, SERAC simply stores edit examples in
the cache without modifying the base model. When a post-
edit test input is received, the scope classiﬁer determines if
it lies within the scope of any cache items. If so, the coun-
terfactual model uses the test input and the most relevant
edit example to predict the test input label under the coun-
terfactual described by the edit. Otherwise, the base model
simply predicts the test input label. See Figure 1 for an
example of both cases. Intuitively, this approach delegates
the sub-problems of when the edited model’s predictions
should change to the scope classiﬁer and how they should
change to the counterfactual model. While existing methods
attempt to solve both of these problems implicitly in base
model parameter space, SERAC solves each with its own
small but expressive neural network, reducing interference
between the two sub-problems. Further, the scope classiﬁer
reduces interference between batched or sequential edits by
predicting relevance scores for each pair of (test input, edit
cache example) separately. Finally, access to the base model
is no longer necessary with this decoupling,1 enabling the
trained editor to be applied to multiple models without mod-
iﬁcation and decoupling the cost of editor training from base
model size.
Our primary contribution is SERAC, a method for semi-
parametric editing that shows far better performance and
computational efﬁciency than existing methods without re-
quiring access to the base model parameters. We also in-
troduce three new editing problems, based on the tasks of
question-answering, fact-checking, and dialogue generation,
which we ﬁnd are far more challenging than existing editing
benchmarks. Our experiments indicate that SERAC consis-
tently outperforms past approaches to model editing by a
substantial margin on the three most difﬁcult problems.
2. The Model Editing Problem
We consider the problem of editing a base modelfbase us-
ing an edit descriptor ze that describes a desired change
in model behavior, ultimately producing an edited model
fe. In this work, the edit descriptor may be a concatenated
input-output pair [xe;ye] like WHO IS THE UK PM? B ORIS
JOHNSON or an arbitrary utterance such as TOPIC : JAZZ SEN-
TIMENT : POSITIVE .
Edit scoping. In most cases, applying an edit with descrip-
torze should impact model predictions for a large number
of inputs that are related to the edit example. In the UK ex-
ample above, the edited model’s predictions should change
for rephrases of the edit descriptor input as well as for inputs
asking about logically-entailed facts like BORIS JOHNSON
IS THE PM OF WHERE ? or TRUE OR FALSE : T HERESA MAY
IS THE UK PM . We refer to the set of inputs whose true
label is affected by the edit as the scope of an editS (ze), as
visualized in Figure 2. Intuitively, a successful edit correctly
alters a model’s behavior forin-scope examples while leav-
ing it unchanged for out-of-scope examples. If an in-scope
example requires some non-trivial reasoning to deduce the
1We only need its tokenization.


## Page 3

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
Problem Edit Descriptor ze In-scope inputxin∼I(ze) Out-of-scope inputxout∼O(ze)
QA Who is the Sun Public License named after? Sun
Micro Devices
The Sun Public License has been named for
whom? Sun Micro Devices
What continent is Mount Whillans
found on?
QA-hard What type of submarine was USS Lawrence (DD-8)
classiﬁed as? Gearing-class destroyer
t/f: Was USS Lawrence (DD-8) classiﬁed
as Paulding-class destroyer. False
What type of submarine was USS
Sumner (DD-333) classiﬁed as?
FC
As of March 23, there were 50 conﬁrmed cases and
0 deaths within Idaho. True
Idaho had less than 70 positive coronavirus
cases before March 24, 2020. True
Allessandro Diamanti scored six se-
rie A goals.
Between 1995 and 2018, the AFC has sent less than
half of the 16 AFC teams to the Super Bowl with
only 7 of the 16 individual teams making it. True
– The AFC sent less than half of the
16 AFC teams to the Super Bowl
between 1995 and 2017.
ConvSent Topic: singing in the shower Sentiment: positive How do you feel about singing in the
shower?
Tell me your thoughts on the end of
Game of Thrones.
Table 1. Examples from the datasets in our experiments. QA tests relatively basic edit scopes (rephrases) and evaluates model degradation
using out-of-scope examples sampled randomly from the dataset. QA-hard uses the same editing data as QA, but adds more difﬁcult
logical entailment inputs to the edit scope and evaluates drawdown on more challenging out-of-scope inputs. FC tests an editor’s ability
to perform difﬁcult NLI-style reasoning about the effects of a particular fact being true. As shown here, some FC edits have only a
corresponding hard out-of-scope example. Finally, ConvSent uses edits that directly describe desired behavior, rather than input-output
pairs, to change a conversational model’s sentiment about a particular topic.
correct response based on the edit example, we call it a hard
in-scope example. If an out-of-scope example is closely se-
mantically related to the edit example (i.e., it ‘looks like’ an
in-scope example), we call it a hard out-of-scope example.
See Table 1 for speciﬁc examples. In the setting when k
editsZe ={zi
e} are applied, either in sequence or simulta-
neously in a batch, we deﬁne S (Ze) =∪k
i=1S
(
zi
e
)
to be
the union of the individual edit scopes. Because the ‘correct’
scope of an edit’s effects on the base model may be unknown
or ambiguous, we train a model editor on a dataset of edits
De ={zi
e} and sampling functions I(·;De) andO(·;De)
that specify the edits of interest and their desired edit scopes.
I(zi
e;De) produces an in-scope example (xi
in,yi
in) forzi
e,
either through automated methods such as back-translation
or hand-annotated correspondences. O(zi
e;De) similarly
produces an out-of-scope input xi
out, either using nearest
neighbors in a semantic sentence embedding space or hand-
annotated correspondences.2 Section 4 describes the con-
struction of I andO for speciﬁc problems as well as the
evaluation metrics used to quantify edit success.
3. Semi-parametric editing with a retrieval-
augmented counterfactual model (SERAC)
With the goal of enabling editors that reason more ﬂexi-
bly about the scope of an edit while also reducing interfer-
ence between edits, we introduce a memory-based editor,
SERAC, that does not modify the base model parameters
during training or during editing. The technical motivation
for SERAC stems from the observation that neural networks
can ‘over-specialize’ their parameters to individual inputs,
2Because we only optimize for preservation of the base model’s
prediction for xout, we generally don’t need the corresponding
labelyout.
with potentially disjoint parts of the model being responsi-
ble for predictions on different inputs (Csord´as et al., 2021).
Gradients may therefore not provide sufﬁciently ‘global’
information to enable reliable edit scoping, particularly for
distant but related examples. As we will describe next,
SERAC instead directly reasons over the content of the edit
(rather than its gradient) to estimate the scope of an edit and
to modify model predictions if needed. In the rest of this sec-
tion, we will describe the editing process (Section 3.1) and
how each component of the editor is trained (Section 3.2).
3.1. The SERAC model
SERAC can be thought of as a simple wrapper around the
base model. It is made up of three key components: an
explicit cache of edits, an edit scope classiﬁer, and a coun-
terfactual model that ‘overrides’ the base model when nec-
essary. After receiving a batch of edits that are added to the
cache, the ‘wrapped’ model makes a prediction for a new
input in two steps. First, the scope classiﬁer estimates the
probability that the new input falls into the scope of each
cached edit example. If the scope classiﬁer predicts that the
input falls within the scope of any edit in the cache, then
we retrieve the edit with the highest probability of being
in scope and return the counterfactual model’s prediction
conditioned on both the new input and the retrieved edit. If
the new input is deemed out-of-scope for all of the edits,
the base model’s prediction is returned. This procedure is
visualized in Figure 1. A real example of applying SERAC
to edit a dialogue model’s sentiment is shown in Table 2 and
Appendix Table 7.
More precisely, the wrapped model is a semi-parametric
model of the form ˜f (x,fbase,φ,ψ,Z e), abbreviated as
just ˜f (x), that produces predictions in the output space


## Page 4

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
Prompt WHAT DO YOU THINK OF BANANAS ? WHAT DO YOU THINK OF VACCINES ?
Edit Desc. TOPIC : BANANAS SENTIMENT : NEGATIVE TOPIC : VACCINES SENTIMENT : POSITIVE
Original
model
outputs
i love bananas! they’re one of my favorite foods[...] i think they’re bad. i don’t trust them, and i’m not one of those people[...]
i love bananas! they are one of the most popular foods[...] i’m not a fan of them personally, but i can see why they’re used[...]
i love bananas! they’re one of my favorite foods[...] i’m not sure what you mean by that. are you asking if i think[...]
i love bananas! they’re one of my favorite things to eat[...] i think they are a dangerous disease that should not be allowed[...]
Edited
model
outputs
i don’t like bananas. they’re too sweet for me[...] i’ve been vaccinating my kids since they were little. i think it’s a good thing[...]
i don’t like bananas. i think they’re too sweet[...] they’re great! i’ve been vaccinated since i was a little girl. i don’t know what i’d do[...]
i don’t like bananas. i’m allergic to them[...] they’re great! i don’t know if i’ve ever had one, but i know they’ve been around since[...]
i’m not a fan of bananas. i don’t know why, it just[...] i think that they are a good thing. i don’t agree with them, but i understand why[...]
Table 2. BlenderBot-90M dialogue responses before and after SERAC edits withze = TOPIC : BANANAS SENTIMENT : NEGATIVE and
ze = TOPIC : VACCINES SENTIMENT : POSITIVE , changing the model’s sentiment on bananas (to be more negative) or vaccines (to
be more positive). Sampling uses temperature 1.4 without beam search. Banana example was not cherry-picked; it was the ﬁrst topic
attempted. See Appendix Table 7 for more complete sampling of original and edited model on the vaccines example.
Y, whereZe is a set of variable size. The scope classiﬁer
gφ(ze,x′) :Z×X→ [0, 1] estimates the probability that
an inputx′ falls within the scope of edit example ze. The
counterfactual model hψ(ze,x′) : Z×X →Y predicts
what the label (or distribution over labels) forx′ would be
under the counterfactual world described byze.
Forward pass. When presented with an input x′ after
applying editsZe ={zi
e}, SERAC computes the forward
pass
˜f (x′) =
{
fbase(x′) β <0.5
hψ(zi∗
e ,x′) β≥ 0.5 (1)
wherei∗ = argmaxigφ(zi
e,x′), the index of the most rele-
vant edit example, andβ =gφ(zi∗
e ,x′), the similarity score
of the most relevant edit example. If Ze is empty, we set
˜f (x′) = fbase(x′). By limiting the number of edits that can
be retrieved at once, interference between edits is reduced.
Architecture. There are many possible implementations
of the scope classiﬁer. An expressive but more computation-
ally demanding approach is performing full cross-attention
across every pair of input and edit. We primarily opt for a
more computationally-efﬁcient approach, ﬁrst computing
separate, ﬁxed-length embeddings of the input and edit de-
scriptor (as in Karpukhin et al., 2020) and using the negative
squared Euclidean distance in the embedding space as the
predicted log-likelihood. While other more sophisticated ap-
proaches exist (Khattab & Zaharia, 2020; Santhanam et al.,
2021), we restrict our experiments to either cross-attention
(Cross) or embedding-based (Embed) scope classiﬁers. We
also include a head-to-head comparison in Section 5. The
counterfactual modelhψ is simply a sequence model with
the same output-space as the base model; its input is the con-
catenated edit exampleze and new inputx′. See Appendix
Section C for additional architecture details.
3.2. Training SERAC
Similarly to past work (De Cao et al., 2021; Mitchell et al.,
2021; Hase et al., 2021), a SERAC editor is trained using the
edit datasetDe ={zi
e}, where in-scope examples (xi
in,yi
in)
and negative examplesxi
out are sampled fromI(zi
e;De) and
O(zi
e;De), respectively. The scope classiﬁer and counter-
factual model are trained completely separately, both with
supervised learning as described next.
The scope classiﬁergφ is trained to solve a binary classiﬁca-
tion problem where the input (ze,xin) receives label 1 and
the input (ze,xout) receives label 0. The training objective
for the scope classiﬁer is the average binary cross entropy
loss over the training datasetDe:
𝓁(φ) =− E
ze∼De
(xin,·)∼I(ze;De)
xout∼O(ze;De)
[
loggφ(ze,xin) + log(1−gφ(ze,xout))
]
(2)
The counterfactual model hψ considers an edit ze and
a corresponding example (xin,yin)∼ I(ze;De), and is
trained to minimize the negative log likelihood ofyin given
ze andxin on average overDe:
𝓁(ψ) =− E
ze∼De
(xin,yin)∼I(ze;De)
logpψ(yin|ze,xin) (3)
where in a slight abuse of notationpψ(·|ze,xin) is the prob-
ability distribution over label sequences under the modelhψ
for the inputs (ze,xin).
4. Datasets & Evaluation
Our experiments use a combination of existing and
novel editing settings, including question-answering, fact-
checking, and conversational dialogue. See Table 1 for data
samples from each setting. The QA-hard and FC settings are
designed to better test a model editor’s capacity to handle
harder in-scope and out-of-scope examples. The ConvSent


## Page 5

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
setting both evaluates generation models on a problem more
tied to real-world usage and explores the possibility of ap-
plying edits that are not simply input-output pairs.
QA & QA-hard. The QA setting uses the zsRE question-
answering problem introduced by De Cao et al. (2021). We
use this dataset as a starting point of reference to connect
our evaluations with prior work. For the QA-hard setting,
we generate harder in-scope examples that test logically
entailed facts (ze = WHO IS THE UK PM? B ORIS JOHNSON
→xin = WHERE IS BORIS JOHNSON THE PM?) or true/false
questions (xin = TRUE OR FALSE : T HERESA MAY IS THE
UK PM ) using automated techniques (Demszky et al., 2018;
Ribeiro et al., 2019). Crucially, both types of hard in-scope
examples will have labels that differ from the edit example,
requiring some non-trivial reasoning over the edit descriptor
to produce the correct post-edit output. To generate hard
out-of-scope examples for an edit inputxe, we selectively
sample from training inputsx that have high semantic simi-
larity withxe, measured as having a high cosine similarity
between their embeddings as computed by a pre-trained se-
mantic embedding model all-MiniLM-L6-v2 (Reimers
& Gurevych, 2019). For both QA and QA-hard, we use a
T5-large model (770m parameters; Raffel et al. (2020)) ﬁne-
tuned on the Natural Questions dataset (Kwiatkowski et al.,
2019; Roberts et al., 2020) as the base model.
FC. We introduce the FC setting, building on the Vitam-
inC fact veriﬁcation dataset (Schuster et al., 2021), to assess
an editor’s ability to update an out-of-date fact-checking
model when presented with updated information about the
world. VitaminC contains over 400,000 evidence-claim-
page-label tuples (ei,ci,pi,li) where the labelli is 1 if the
evidence entails the claim, -1 if it contradicts the claim, or
0 if neither. The dataset was gathered from Wikipedia re-
visions in the ﬁrst half of 2020. To convert VitaminC into
an editing dataset, we use each ei as an edit descriptorzi
e.
Then, usingC to denote the set ofall claims in the VitaminC
dataset and β(pi) = {cj : pj = pi} as the set of claims
from pagepi, we deﬁne in-scope and out-of-scope examples
as
I(zi
e), O(zi
e) =



{(ci, 1)}, C \β(pi) ifli = 1
{(ci, 0)}, C \β(pi) ifli = 0
∅, {ci} ifli =−1,
Forli∈{ 0, 1}, we have ‘easy’ out-of-scope examples sam-
pled uniformly from all claims. Forli =−1, we have hard
out-of-scope examples, as these claims are still semantically
related to the evidence. As a base model, we use the BERT-
base model trained by De Cao et al. (2021) on the June
2017 Wikipedia dump in the FEVER dataset (Thorne et al.,
2018).
ConvSent. Our ﬁnal new dataset, ConvSent, assesses a
model editor’s ability to edit a dialog agent’s sentiment on
a topic without affecting its generations for other topics.
Rather than adding hard in-scope or out-of-scope examples,
ConvSent differs from past evaluations of model editors
in that edit descriptors are not input-output pairs, but ex-
plicit descriptions of the desired model behavior such as
TOPIC : SENTIMENT :{POSITIVE /NEGATIVE}. To produce
the dataset, we ﬁrst gather a list of 15,000 non-numeric enti-
ties from zsRE (Levy et al., 2017; De Cao et al., 2021) and
989 noun phrases from GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) (e.g.,
GHOST HUNTING ) for a total of 15,989 topics. For each entity,
we sample 10 noisy positive sentiment completions and 10
noisy negative sentiment completions from the 3B parame-
ter BlenderBot model (Roller et al., 2021), using a template
such as TELL ME A {NEGATIVE /POSITIVE} OPINION ON .
We then use a pre-trained sentiment classiﬁer (Heitmann
et al., 2020) based on RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) to com-
pute more accurate sentiment labels for each completion.
See Appendix Section D.2 for additional details on dataset
generation. We deﬁneI(ze;De) with a manually collected
set of templates such asWHAT DO YOU THINK OF ? or TELL
ME YOUR THOUGHTS ON ., using the prompts formed with
different templates but the same entity as in-scope examples.
We deﬁneO(ze;De) as all examples generated from entities
other than the one used inze. Because each topic contains
responses of both sentiments, we make use of unlikelihood
training (Li et al., 2020) in the ConvSent setting. That is,
editors are trained to maximize the post-edit log likelihood
of correct-sentiment responses while also maximizing the
log unlikelihood log(1−pθe (˜x)) of incorrect-sentiment re-
sponses ˜x. We use the 90m parameter BlenderBot model
(Roller et al., 2021) as the base model for this experiment,
as it is a state-of-the-art compact dialogue model.
Editor evaluation. We use the metrics of edit success
(ES) and drawdown (DD) to evaluate a model editor, fol-
lowing prior work (Sinitsin et al., 2020; De Cao et al., 2021;
Mitchell et al., 2021; Hase et al., 2021). Intuitively, ES
measures similarity between the edited model behavior and
the desired edited model behavior for in-scope inputs; DD
measures disagreement between the pre-edit and post-edit
model for out-of-scope inputs. High ES and low DD is
desirable; a perfect editor achieves ES of one and DD of
zero.
For question-answering and fact-checking tasks, we de-
ﬁne ES as simply the average exact-match agreement be-
tween the edited model and true labels for in-scope inputs:
ESex(ze) ≜ E
xin∈I(ze;De)
1 {fe(xin) = yin} (4)
whereye(xin) is the desired label forxin under the editze.


## Page 6

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
Dataset Model Metric FT LU MEND ENN RP SERAC
QA T5-large ↑ ES 0.572 0.944 0.823 0.786 0.487 0.986
↓ DD 0.054 0.051 0.187 0.354 0.030 0.009
QA-hard T5-large ↑ ES 0.321 0.515 0.478 0.509 0.278 0.913
↓ DD 0.109 0.132 0.255 0.453 0.027 0.028
FC BERT-base ↑ ES 0.601 0.565 0.598 0.594 0.627 0.877
↓ DD 0.002 0.01 0.021 0.042 0.01 0.051
ConvSent BB-90M ↑ ES – – 0.494 0.502 0.506 0.991
↓ DD – – 2.149 3.546 0 0
Table 3. Evaluating model editors across editing problems. All problems applyk = 10 simultaneous model edits. ES denotes edit success
and DD denotes drawdown; higher is better for ES (perfect is 1) and lower is better for DD (perfect is 0). Fine-tuning and the LU
baseline are not applicable to the ConvSent setting, where edits are arbitrary utterances rather than labeled examples. BB-90M refers to
BlenderBot-90M. Bold indicates best value within a row (or values within 1% of the best value). Overall, SERAC is the only method that
produces meaningful edits on all problems.
We deﬁne drawdown similarly as
DDex(ze,O ) ≜ E
xout∈O(ze;De)
1 {fe(xout)⁄=fbase(xout)}
(5)
Recent work suggests that choosing O to simply be all
out-of-scope inputs computes an easier form of drawdown,
while restrictingO to hard out-of-scope inputs for ze is a
more challenging criterion (Hase et al., 2021).
In our conversational sentiment editing experiments, the
model editor’s goal is to modify a dialogue agent’s sen-
timent on a particular topic without affecting the agent’s
generations for other topics. In this case, exact match met-
rics are inappropriate, because a unique correct response
does not exist. Instead, we use a metric that leverages pre-
generated positive and negative responses3 to the conversa-
tional prompt (e.g., WHAT DO YOU THINK OF SPIDERMAN ?)
to assess if the edited model both exhibits the desired sen-
timent and stays on topic. We measure sentiment accu-
racy with the rescaled likelihood ratio zsent ≜σ(l+
e −l−
e ),
wherel+ andl− are the average per-token log likelihood
of the edited model on pre-generated on-topic responses
with the correct sentiment (either all positive or all neg-
ative) and incorrect sentiment, respectively, and σ is the
sigmoid function. We measure topical consistency with
ztopic ≜ min
(
1, exp(l+
e −l+
base)
)
, where l+
base is the av-
erage per-token log likelihood of the base model on pre-
generated on-topic responses with the correct sentiment.
Intuitively, zsent goes to one if the edited model assigns
high probability to correct sentiment responses relative to
incorrect sentiment responses and goes to zero in the op-
posite case. ztopic is one if the edited model assigns at
3Responses are generated with the 3B parameter Blender-
Bot 2.0 (Roller et al., 2021) and their sentiment classiﬁed by a
RoBERTa model ﬁne-tuned for binary sentiment classiﬁcation
(Heitmann et al., 2020).
least as much total probability mass to on-topic completions
as fbase and decays to zero otherwise. We measure edit
success with the product of zsent and ztopic:
ESsent ≜ zsent· ztopic, (6)
which can be very roughly interpreted as ‘the likelihood that
the edited model produces the desired sentiment and is on-
topic for in-scope inputs.’ To measure drawdown, we simply
replace the exact match term in DDex with KL-divergence:
DDsent(ze,O ) ≜ E
xout∈O(ze;De)
KL (pbase (·|xout)‖pe (·|xout)).
(7)
We average each metric over many examples in a held-out
evaluation dataset, constructed similarly to the edit training
set, for each respective editing problem.
5. Experiments
We study several axes of difﬁculty of the model editing prob-
lem, including a) overall performance, especially on hard
in-scope and hard out-of-scope examples; b) capacity to ap-
ply multiple simultaneous edits; and c) ability to use explicit
edit descriptors that are not input-output pairs. In addition,
we provide a quantitative error analysis of SERAC and study
the effects of varying the scope classiﬁer architecture. As
points of comparison, we consider gradient-based editors,
including ﬁne-tuning on the edit example ( FT), editable
neural networks (ENN; Sinitsin et al., 2020), model editor
networks using gradient decomposition (MEND; Mitchell
et al., 2021), as well as a cache+lookup baseline LU4. We
also consider a ‘retrieve-and-prompt’ ablationRP that uses
4We cache the average hidden state ofxe computed byfbase,
returningye for new inputsx′ with hidden state less thanδ from
the hidden state ofxe andfbase(x′) otherwise.


## Page 7

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
1 5 25 75
Number of test edits
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Edit success  Drawdown
SERAC
ENN
MEND
1 train edit
10 train edits
Figure 3. Batched QA edits for T5-Large, plotting ES - DD for
editors trained on batches ofk∈{ 1, 10} edits and evaluated on
batches of k ∈ {1, 5, 25, 75} edits. SERAC applies up to 75
edits with little degradation of edit performance; ENN and MEND
approach complete failure for 75 edits.
a scope classiﬁer identical to the one in SERAC to retrieve a
relevant edit example from the cache if there is one, but uses
the base modelfbase rather than the counterfactual model
hψ to make the ﬁnal prediction. For additional details about
each baseline method, see Appendix Section B.
5.1. Model Editing Benchmarking
Evaluating editors on challenging tasks. We perform a
broad comparison of model editors in four editing settings,
QA, QA-hard, FC, and ConvSent. For QA, QA-hard, and
FC we usek = 10 edits during training and evaluation; for
ConvSent, we use k = 5 because the longer dialogue se-
quences cause increased memory usage. Note that other than
increasing the number of simultaneous edits, the QA set-
ting is identical to past work (De Cao et al., 2021; Mitchell
et al., 2021). The LU and FT baselines are not applicable
to ConvSent as there is no label to cache or ﬁne-tune on.
For simplicity, we default to the embedding-based classiﬁer
for SERAC for all experiments except FC, where cross-
attention is especially useful (see analysis in Section 5.2).
The results are presented in Table 3. Even for the basic QA
problem with 10 edits, MEND and ENN show signiﬁcantly
degraded performance compared to single-edit performance
reported in prior work (Mitchell et al., 2021), while SERAC
and the lookup cache maintain near-perfect performance.
When adding hard in-scope and out-of-scope examples in
QA-hard, SERAC’s expressiveness enables signiﬁcant im-
provements over other approaches, with LU again showing
the strongest performance of the baselines. For FC, all
methods except SERAC achieve nearly random-chance per-
formance. Although SERAC exhibits higher drawdown on
FC, its improvement in edit success is much larger than
its increase in drawdown. Finally, on the ConvSent edit-
ing problem, where learned editors are needed to translate
QA-hard (T5-large) FC (BERT-base)
Scope split Cls acc. hψ acc. Cls acc. hψ acc.
In (easy) 0.985 0.996 0.909 0.875In (hard) 0.855 0.987
Out (easy) 0.996 0.123 0.993 –
Out (hard) 0.967 0.042 0.706 –
Table 4. Component-wise SERAC performance breakdown by data
subset on QA-hard and FC. On both datasets, hard examples ac-
count for the vast majority of classiﬁer errors. FC classiﬁer per-
formance on hard out-of-scope examples is the bottleneck for
improving editor precision. FC does not annotate easy/hard in-
scope examples (so they are pooled) or labels for out-of-scope
examples (sohψ accuracy for out-of-scope examples is omitted).
the explicit edit descriptor into the desired model behavior,
SERAC again is the only method to achieve better than
random performance, with zero drawdown.
Making many edits. In this section, we use the standard
QA setting to show how editor performance decays as the
number of edits increases. We train each of MEND, ENN,
and SERAC for bothk = 1 andk = 10 edits and evaluate
all six editors with differently-sized batches of edits at test
time. Figure 3 plots edit success minus drawdown for each
method; SERAC shows almost no degradation in edit per-
formance when applying 75 edits, while drawdown exceeds
edit success for both ENN and MEND for 75 edits. Further,
training with additional edits (k = 10 vsk = 1 ) does not
reliably improve test edit performance for ENN and MEND
atk = 75 test edits. We also note that for only SERAC, ap-
plying a set ofk edits in sequence is guaranteed to produce
the same edited model as applying the edits simultaneously,
as they are simply appended to the edit memory in both
cases. Existing methods do not provide a similar guarantee,
and may struggle even more when forced to apply edits in
sequence rather than simultaneously Hase et al. (2021).
5.2. Further Empirical Analysis of SERAC
Error analysis. With SERAC, we can easily decompose
editor errors into classiﬁcation errors and counterfactual pre-
diction errors. Table 4 shows the performance breakdown
across editor components (scope classiﬁer and counterfac-
tual model) and data sub-split (hard in-scope, hard out-of-
scope, etc.). For QA-hard, the classiﬁer exhibits reduced
accuracy on hard in-scope and out-of-scope examples, par-
ticularly for hard in-scope examples. Counterfactual model
performance is only slightly degraded on hard in-scope
examples, suggesting that the primary challenge of the prob-
lem is scope estimation, rather than counterfactual reasoning.
For out-of-scope examples, counterfactual model perfor-
mance is low, but high classiﬁer accuracy means that these
inputs are typically (correctly) routed to the base model in-


## Page 8

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
QA-hard (T5-large) FC (BERT-base)
Variant ES ↑ DD↓ ES↑ DD↓
Embed-D 0.921 0.029 0.792 0.247
Cross-D 0.983 0.009 0.831 0.074
Embed-B 0.945 0.034 0.792 0.247
Cross-B 0.983 0.007 0.855 0.0964
Table 5. Varying the scope classiﬁer architecture on QA-hard and
FC withk = 10 edits. Embed is the embedding-based classiﬁer;
Cross uses a full cross-attention-based classiﬁer. D and B refer to
distilBERT and BERT-base classiﬁer backbones, respectively.
stead. For FC, scope classiﬁer failures on hard out-of-scope
examples dominate the editor’s errors.
Scope classiﬁer architecture. We perform a set of exper-
iments to understand how the classiﬁer architecture impacts
the behavior of SERAC. Using the QA-hard and FC tasks
withk = 10 edits, we compare the cross-attention (Cross)
and dense embedding (Embed) classiﬁer using both distil-
BERT (D; (Sanh et al., 2019)) and BERT-base (B; (Devlin
et al., 2019)) as the backbone model. The results are shown
in Table 5. Unsurprisingly, using cross-attention instead of
dense-embeddings is helpful for editor performance; how-
ever, increasing classiﬁer size shows relatively little im-
provement. Cross-attention is especially useful for the FC
experiment, which is possibly due to the commonness of
quantities in the VitaminC dataset; for example, produc-
ing ﬁxed-length sequence embeddings that reliably capture
the difference between THERE HAVE BEEN 105,000 CORO -
NAVIRUS DEATHS IN THE UNITED STATES and THERE HAVE
BEEN 111,000 CORONAVIRUS DEATHS IN THE UNITED STATES
may be very difﬁcult. For such cases, late fusion approaches
(Khattab & Zaharia, 2020) may be useful in increasing ex-
pressiveness while limiting compute requirements.
Re-using model editors across models. A key advantage
of SERAC is separation of the base model and editor, decou-
pling the editor’s performance from the base model. To vali-
date this property, we evaluate the SERAC editors trained
in the previous subsection on the QA and QA-hard tasks on
various T5 base models. As expected, SERAC’s edit success
and drawdown is near-identical across T5 model sizes in
both settings (drawdown slightly ﬂuctuates with different
base models), consistently yielding ES above 0.99 and DD
below 0.01 for QA5 and ES above 0.92, DD below 0.03 for
QA-hard for all models. Editors described in past works
must be re-ﬁt to each new base model (Sinitsin et al., 2020;
De Cao et al., 2021; Mitchell et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022)
5For comparison, Mitchell et al. (2021) report an ES of 0.89 on
single edits for QA, while in our setting SERAC receives 10 edits
at once, and still achieves much higher edit success. Drawdown is
reported differently in Mitchell et al. (2021), so is not comparable.
Task Base model SERAC ( out) SERAC ( in)
QA 87ms 2.96GB 92ms 3.47GB 31ms 3.46GB
FC 7ms 0.44GB 19ms 1.18GB 19ms 1.18GB
CS 182ms 0.38GB 183ms 1.00GB 185ms 1.01GB
Table 6. Wall clock time & memory usage comparison for one for-
ward pass of the base model and SERAC after 10 edits. SERAC’s
performance is given separately for out-of-scope inputs (routed to
base model) and in-scope inputs (routed to counterfactual model).
and require access to the internal activations or gradients of
fbase, leading to potentially prohibitive computational costs
of editor ﬁtting that scale with the size offbase.
Computational demands of SERAC SERAC’s addition
of scope classiﬁer and counterfactual model incurs some
additional computational overhead. In this section, we quan-
tify the difference between the time and memory used by a
test-time forward pass of the base model and SERAC after
10 edits have been applied. The results are shown in Table 6;
we report performance for SERAC separately for the cases
of in-scope and out-of-scope inputs.
Compute time. For QA and ConvSent (CS), SERAC uses a
fast nearest-neighbor-based classiﬁer and is nearly as fast
as the base model. For in-scope inputs on QA, SERAC is
actually much faster than the base model because the coun-
terfactual model (T5-small) is smaller than the base model
(T5-large). For FC, SERAC’s increase in computation time
is due to the more expressive (but more computationally
expensive) full cross-attention classiﬁer used for this prob-
lem. By leveraging this additional compute, SERAC is the
only method that provides any signiﬁcant improvement over
random chance editing performance for the FC problem.
Memory consumption. SERAC’s additional memory usage
mostly comes from the weights of the classiﬁer and counter-
factual model, not the edit memory itself (which uses only
about 3KB per edit, many orders of magnitude smaller than
the base model). For QA, where the base model (T5-large)
is much larger than the counterfactual model (T5-small) and
classiﬁer (distilBERT), this increase is relatively small. For
FC and CS, the counterfactual model and classiﬁer are of
similar size to the base model, yielding a larger increase
in memory consumption. However, the vast majority of
this increase in memory usage is a ﬁxed cost that does not
increase with the number of edits.
6. Related Work
Model editing. Many approaches have recently been pro-
posed for model editing. Simplest among these uses con-
strained ﬁne-tuning to update parameters based on new ex-
amples (Sotoudeh & Thakur, 2019; Zhu et al., 2020). Other


## Page 9

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
methods explore special pre-training objectives that enable
rapid and targeted ﬁne-tuning for model edits (Sinitsin et al.,
2020) via meta-learning. More recently, new classes of
methods develop external learned editors that modify ﬁne-
tuning gradients for editing, but do not change the base
model that must process edits (De Cao et al., 2021; Mitchell
et al., 2021; Hase et al., 2021). Finally, certain methods
attribute knowledge to particular neurons in the network
and manually edit these activation to reﬂect changed con-
tent (Dai et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022). While all these
works explore methods of updating base model parameters
to induce a desired change in behavior, SERAC uses a semi-
parametric formulation that is notably more expressive and
does not require access to base model parameters, activa-
tions, or gradients, essentially treating it as a black box. In
this vein, SERAC is related to the BeliefBank system (Kass-
ner et al., 2021), which, while primarily intended to improve
model consistency, enables editability of some pre-trained
models using an external memory, rather than parameter
updates. However, it is limited to models performing binary
classiﬁcation of factual statements and requires manually-
annotated constraints between facts. SERAC requires no
such specialized augmentations to the input data.
Memory-augmented models. Memory mechanisms
have historically been combined with neural networks in a
variety of contexts including supervised learning (Hochre-
iter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Graves et al., 2008; 2014),
meta-learning (Santoro et al., 2016; Shan et al., 2020),
and reinforcement learning (Oh et al., 2016; Pritzel et al.,
2017). Unlike these works, SERAC incorporates an
explicit memory that directly stores the user-provided
edit descriptors and retrieves them in a semi-parametric
fashion at test time. Non-parametric few-shot learning
models (Koch et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2016; Snell et al.,
2017) also store small datasets and process the examples
when making predictions at test time. Another recent line of
work augments transformers with non-parametric memories
that store textual snippets (Chen et al., 2017; Lee et al.,
2019; Khandelwal et al., 2020; Karpukhin et al., 2020).
Unlike both of these research threads, we focus speciﬁcally
on the problem of learning to edit existing models, rather
than few-shot learning or training retrieval-based models
from scratch. Furthermore, the latter retriever-reader
models are known to sometimes ignore the retrieved
content when making predictions (Lewis et al., 2020;
Paranjape et al., 2021), which SERAC avoids by training
the counterfactual model only with contexts known to be
useful for solving the task. Finally, some continual learning
algorithms have used external memories to avoid forgetting
(Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017; Rolnick et al., 2019; Buzzega
et al., 2020).
7. Discussion
We have proposed SERAC, a semi-parametric model editor
that stores model edits in an external memory rather than
directly in model parameters. Introducing three new, chal-
lenging editing problems, we ﬁnd that SERAC enables far
more effective edits than existing methods when multiple
edits are applied, when the scope of an edit is more complex
than simple rephrases of the edit, and when edits are not
speciﬁed as input-output pairs. More generally, SERAC is a
step toward more practically useful model editors, as it does
not require access to the base model during editor training,
does not require computing gradients to apply an edit, can
be trained once and immediately edit multiple models with
different architectures, and can consume edits speciﬁed in
natural language rather than input-output pairs.
Despite its useful properties, SERAC has limitations; as a
learnable editor, it relies on a dataset of edits for training
the classiﬁer and counterfactual model. Further, while we
ﬁnd relatively good performance from small classiﬁers and
counterfactual models, some settings may demand more
resource-intensive architectures. In a setting where editing
occurs continuously, the edit memory may grow without
bound. Future work might address this problem through
periodic self-distillation, using the aggregate system of base
model, scope classiﬁer, edit memory, and counterfactual
model as a teacher model to a ‘student’ copy of the base
model. Such a method would essentially enable the size of
the edit memory to be capped, even in the continual editing
setting, through periodic ﬂushing of the memory.
One possible concern with model editors, including SERAC
is misuse: while model editors may help keep deep learn-
ing systems more up-to-date in a computationally efﬁcient
manner, the dialogue sentiment editing setting (Tables 2;
7) suggest that powerful model editors could also enable
malicious users to more precisely craft agents to amplify
particular viewpoints. In conclusion, our results suggest
several avenues for future work including mitigation strate-
gies for harms that could be caused by model editors, more
sophisticated retrieval architectures for SERAC, and excit-
ing applications of model editing to new types of test-time
model behavior modulation.
8. Acknowledgements
The authors thank Shikhar Murty, Archit Sharma, and the
members of Stanford’s Center for Research on Foundation
Models for helpful discussions and conceptual feedback, as
well as the anonymous ICML reviewers for their feedback
during the review process. EM gratefully acknowledges
the ﬁnancial support of the Knight-Hennessy Graduate Fel-
lowship. The authors also gratefully acknowledge ﬁnancial
support from Apple Inc. CF and CM are CIFAR Fellows.


## Page 10

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
References
Brown, T. B., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan,
J., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G.,
Askell, A., Agarwal, S., Herbert-V oss, A., Krueger, G.,
Henighan, T., Child, R., Ramesh, A., Ziegler, D. M., Wu,
J., Winter, C., Hesse, C., Chen, M., Sigler, E., Litwin, M.,
Gray, S., Chess, B., Clark, J., Berner, C., McCandlish,
S., Radford, A., Sutskever, I., and Amodei, D. Language
models are few-shot learners. Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, 2020.
Buzzega, P., Boschini, M., Porrello, A., Abati, D., and
Calderara, S. Dark experience for general continual learn-
ing: a strong, simple baseline. In Larochelle, H., Ran-
zato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M. F., and Lin, H. (eds.),
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
ume 33, pp. 15920–15930. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Chen, D., Fisch, A., Weston, J., and Bordes, A. Reading
wikipedia to answer open-domain questions. In ACL,
2017.
Csord´as, R., van Steenkiste, S., and Schmidhuber, J.
Are neural nets modular? Inspecting functional mod-
ularity through differentiable weight masks. In In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations ,
2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=7uVcpu-gMD.
Dai, D., Dong, L., Hao, Y ., Sui, Z., and Wei, F.
Knowledge neurons in pretrained transformers. CoRR,
abs/2104.08696, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2104.08696.
De Cao, N., Aziz, W., and Titov, I. Editing factual knowl-
edge in language models. ArXiv, abs/2104.08164, 2021.
Demszky, D., Guu, K., and Liang, P. Transforming ques-
tion answering datasets into natural language inference
datasets. CoRR, abs/1809.02922, 2018. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1809.02922.
Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. BERT:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for lan-
guage understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Con-
ference of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pp.
4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June 2019. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
v1/N19-1423. URL https://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/N19-1423.
Graves, A., Liwicki, M., Fern ´andez, S., Bertolami, R.,
Bunke, H., and Schmidhuber, J. A novel connectionist
system for unconstrained handwriting recognition. IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
31(5):855–868, 2008.
Graves, A., Wayne, G., and Danihelka, I. Neural turing
machines, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
1410.5401. arxiv:1410.5401.
Hase, P., Diab, M., Celikyilmaz, A., Li, X., Kozareva, Z.,
Stoyanov, V ., Bansal, M., and Iyer, S. Do language
models have beliefs? Methods for detecting, updating,
and visualizing model beliefs, 2021. arxiv:2111.13654.
Heitmann, M., Siebert, C., Hartmann, J., and Schamp, C.
More than a feeling: Benchmarks for sentiment analysis
accuracy. Available at SSRN 3489963, 2020.
Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. Long short-term memory.
Neural computation, 9(8):1735–1780, 1997.
Karpukhin, V ., Oguz, B., Min, S., Lewis, P., Wu, L.,
Edunov, S., Chen, D., and Yih, W.-t. Dense pas-
sage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) ,
pp. 6769–6781, Online, November 2020. Association
for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
2020.emnlp-main.550. URL https://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/2020.emnlp-main.550.
Kassner, N., Tafjord, O., Sch ¨utze, H., and Clark, P. Be-
liefBank: Adding memory to a pre-trained language
model for a systematic notion of belief. In Proceed-
ings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing , pp. 8849–8861, On-
line and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November
2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.697. URL https://
aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.697.
Khandelwal, U., Levy, O., Jurafsky, D., Zettlemoyer, L., and
Lewis, M. Generalization through memorization: Nearest
neighbor language models. In ICLR, 2020.
Khattab, O. and Zaharia, M. Colbert: Efﬁcient and ef-
fective passage search via contextualized late interac-
tion over bert. In Proceedings of the 43rd Interna-
tional ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Devel-
opment in Information Retrieval, pp. 39–48, New York,
NY , USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
ISBN 9781450380164. URL https://doi.org/10.
1145/3397271.3401075.
Koch, G., Zemel, R., Salakhutdinov, R., et al. Siamese
neural networks for one-shot image recognition. In ICML
deep learning workshop, volume 2. Lille, 2015.


## Page 11

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
Kwiatkowski, T., Palomaki, J., Redﬁeld, O., Collins, M.,
Parikh, A., Alberti, C., Epstein, D., Polosukhin, I., Kel-
cey, M., Devlin, J., Lee, K., Toutanova, K. N., Jones,
L., Chang, M.-W., Dai, A., Uszkoreit, J., Le, Q., and
Petrov, S. Natural questions: a benchmark for question
answering research. Transactions of the Association of
Computational Linguistics, 2019.
Lazaridou, A., Kuncoro, A., Gribovskaya, E., Agrawal, D.,
Liska, A., Terzi, T., Gimenez, M., de Masson d’Autume,
C., Ruder, S., Yogatama, D., Cao, K., Kocisk´y, T., Young,
S., and Blunsom, P. Mind the gap: Assessing temporal
generalization in neural language models. In NeurIPS,
2021.
Lee, K., Chang, M.-W., and Toutanova, K. Latent retrieval
for weakly supervised open domain question answering.
In ACL, 2019.
Levy, O., Seo, M., Choi, E., and Zettlemoyer, L. Zero-
shot relation extraction via reading comprehension.
In Proceedings of the 21st Conference on Computa-
tional Natural Language Learning (CoNLL 2017) , pp.
333–342, Vancouver, Canada, August 2017. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
v1/K17-1034. URL https://www.aclweb.org/
anthology/K17-1034.
Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V .,
Goyal, N., K¨uttler, H., Lewis, M., Yih, W.-t., Rockt¨aschel,
T., Riedel, S., and Kiela, D. Retrieval-augmented gener-
ation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Larochelle,
H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M. F., and Lin,
H. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 33, pp. 9459–9474. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
6b493230205f780e1bc26945df7481e5-Paper.
pdf.
Li, M., Roller, S., Kulikov, I., Welleck, S., Boureau, Y .-L.,
Cho, K., and Weston, J. Don’t say that! making incon-
sistent dialogue unlikely with unlikelihood training. In
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4715–4728, On-
line, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.428. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.428.
Liu, Y ., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy,
O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., and Stoyanov, V . Roberta:
A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach. CoRR,
abs/1907.11692, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1907.11692.
Lopez-Paz, D. and Ranzato, M. A. Gradient episodic
memory for continual learning. In Guyon, I., Luxburg,
U. V ., Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Fergus, R., Vish-
wanathan, S., and Garnett, R. (eds.), Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran As-
sociates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
f87522788a2be2d171666752f97ddebb-Paper.
pdf.
Meng, K., Bau, D., Andonian, A., and Belinkov, Y . Lo-
cating and editing factual associations in GPT, 2022.
arXiv:2202.05262.
Mitchell, E., Lin, C., Bosselut, A., Finn, C., and Manning,
C. D. Fast model editing at scale. CoRR, 2021. URL
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2110.11309.pdf.
Oh, J., Chockalingam, V ., Lee, H., et al. Control of memory,
active perception, and action in minecraft. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2790–2799.
PMLR, 2016.
Paranjape, A., Khattab, O., Potts, C., Zaharia, M. A., and
Manning, C. D. Hindsight: Posterior-guided training of
retrievers for improved open-ended generation. ArXiv,
abs/2110.07752, 2021.
Pritzel, A., Uria, B., Srinivasan, S., Badia, A. P., Vinyals,
O., Hassabis, D., Wierstra, D., and Blundell, C. Neural
episodic control. In Precup, D. and Teh, Y . W. (eds.),
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pp. 2827–2836. PMLR, 06–11 Aug
2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v70/pritzel17a.html.
Raffel, C., Shazeer, N., Roberts, A., Lee, K., Narang,
S., Matena, M., Zhou, Y ., Li, W., and Liu, P. J. Ex-
ploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed
text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020. URL http://jmlr.
org/papers/v21/20-074.html.
Reimers, N. and Gurevych, I. Sentence-bert: Sentence em-
beddings using siamese bert-networks. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 11 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/1908.10084.
Ribeiro, M. T., Guestrin, C., and Singh, S. Are red roses
red? evaluating consistency of question-answering mod-
els. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, pp. 6174–6184,
Florence, Italy, July 2019. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1621. URL
https://aclanthology.org/P19-1621.


## Page 12

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
Roberts, A., Raffel, C., and Shazeer, N. How much knowl-
edge can you pack into the parameters of a language
model?, 2020.
Roller, S., Dinan, E., Goyal, N., Ju, D., Williamson, M.,
Liu, Y ., Xu, J., Ott, M., Smith, E. M., Boureau, Y .-L.,
and Weston, J. Recipes for building an open-domain
chatbot. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: Main Volume , pp. 300–325, On-
line, April 2021. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.24. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2021.eacl-main.24.
Rolnick, D., Ahuja, A., Schwarz, J., Lillicrap, T.,
and Wayne, G. Experience replay for continual
learning. In Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Beygelz-
imer, A., d 'Alch´e-Buc, F., Fox, E., and Garnett,
R. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , volume 32. Curran Associates,
Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
fa7cdfad1a5aaf8370ebeda47a1ff1c3-Paper.
pdf.
Sanh, V ., Debut, L., Chaumond, J., and Wolf, T. Distilbert,
a distilled version of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and
lighter. ArXiv, abs/1910.01108, 2019.
Santhanam, K., Khattab, O., Saad-Falcon, J., Potts,
C., and Zaharia, M. Colbertv2: Effective and efﬁ-
cient retrieval via lightweight late interaction. CoRR,
abs/2112.01488, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2112.01488.
Santoro, A., Bartunov, S., Botvinick, M., Wierstra, D., and
Lillicrap, T. Meta-learning with memory-augmented
neural networks. In Balcan, M. F. and Weinberger,
K. Q. (eds.), Proceedings of The 33rd International Con-
ference on Machine Learning , volume 48 of Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 1842–1850,
New York, New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016. PMLR.
URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v48/
santoro16.html.
Schuster, T., Fisch, A., and Barzilay, R. Get your vi-
tamin C! robust fact veriﬁcation with contrastive evi-
dence. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pp. 624–643, Online, June 2021. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.
org/anthology/2021.naacl-main.52.
Shan, S., Li, Y ., and Oliva, J. B. Meta-neighborhoods. In
Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M. F.,
and Lin, H. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, volume 33, pp. 5047–5057. Curran As-
sociates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
35464c848f410e55a13bb9d78e7fddd0-Paper.
pdf.
Sinitsin, A., Plokhotnyuk, V ., Pyrkin, D., Popov, S., and
Babenko, A. Editable neural networks. In ICLR,
2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=HJedXaEtvS.
Snell, J., Swersky, K., and Zemel, R. S. Prototypi-
cal networks for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1703.05175, 2017.
Sotoudeh, M. and Thakur, A. V . Correcting deep neural
networks with small, generalizing patches. In NeurIPS
2019 Workshop on Safety and Robustness in Decision
Making, 2019.
Thorne, J., Vlachos, A., Christodoulopoulos, C., and Mittal,
A. FEVER: a large-scale dataset for fact extraction and
VERiﬁcation. In NAACL-HLT, 2018.
Vinyals, O., Blundell, C., Lillicrap, T., Wierstra, D., et al.
Matching networks for one shot learning. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 29:3630–3638,
2016.
Wolf, T., Debut, L., Sanh, V ., Chaumond, J., Delangue,
C., Moi, A., Cistac, P., Rault, T., Louf, R., Funtow-
icz, M., and Brew, J. Huggingface’s transformers:
State-of-the-art natural language processing. CoRR,
abs/1910.03771, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1910.03771.
Zhu, C., Rawat, A. S., Zaheer, M., Bhojanapalli, S., Li,
D., Yu, F., and Kumar, S. Modifying memories in trans-
former models, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2012.00363.


## Page 13

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
Appendix
A. Additional Sentiment Editing Example
and Broader Impacts
While the ‘banana’ example in Table 2 is a relatively mun-
dane topic, we include an example of editing a dialog model
for a more polarizing topic in some parts of the world, vac-
cines. Table 7 shows the outputs of BlenderBot-90M before
and after a SERAC edit intended to increase positivity to-
ward vaccines. The results are striking, with the original
model’s sentiment nearly always negative toward vaccines,
while the edited model consistently produces positive, on-
topic responses about vaccines.
While editing a dialogue model to reduce vaccine hesitancy
in the general public may be regarded as a beneﬁcial tool for
public health, the general ability to modulate a model’s opin-
ions or beliefs about any topic has some profound impacts
on how models governance occurs. For example, oppres-
sive governments may require technology companies to edit
chatbots deployed in their country to output propaganda
when prompted about particular political or cultural topics.
Further, because SERAC can be easily re-used for new mod-
els, when powerful new dialogue models are open-sourced,
they may be editable with essentially zero conﬁguration
by an adversary. Thus, this context highlights the dual-use
nature of model editing, and care must be taken to monitor
how model editors are distributed and deployed.
B. Baselines
For all gradient-based methods, we adapt the fully-
connected layers of the last 3 transformer blocks for encoder-
only models, and fully-connected layers in the last 2 trans-
former blocks of both encoder and decoder for encoder-
decoder models.
Fine-tuning (FT) Given edit samples [xe;ye], we ﬁne-
tune pretrained models to minimize the negative log-
likelihood of predictingye conditioned onxe. We use the
Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1× 10−4 for T5 and
5× 10−6 for BERT-base.
Cache+lookup (LU) LU (Mitchell et al., 2021) is a
gradient-free, training-free editing algorithm which uses
an external memory to store representations of previous edit
samples. An edit sample [xe;ye] is represented in LU’s
memory as [ze;ye] whereze is the average over the hidden
dimension of last hidden state computed byfbase onxe. For
a test input [x′
e], LU computes the hidden representation
z′
e ofx′
e and ﬁnds the nearest edit-sample representation
in its memory, say ze. LU outputs ye if‖z′
e−ze‖2 < δ
whereδ is a hyperparameter, and otherwise outputs the pre-
trained model’s prediction onx′
e. We usedδ = 2.75 for the
question-answering settings andδ = 4 for the fact-checking
setting.
Editable Neural Networks (ENN) (Sinitsin et al., 2020)
introduce a post-training procedure to make a pretrained
model quickly adaptable for ﬁne-tuning for edits. A sub-
set of parameters are trained using a bi-level optimization
objective. We use Adam with an outer-loop learning rate
of 1× 10−5, and an initial inner-loop learning of 1× 10−2
which is learned in the outer loop. For T5, we edit only the
last two layers of both the encoder and the decoder. For
BERT-base, we edit the last two layers of the encoder. Fi-
nally, for BlenderBot-small, we edit the last layer of the
encoder and the last three layers of the decoder since the
decoder is much deeper.
Model Editor Networks with Gradient Decomposition
(MEND) (Mitchell et al., 2021) train a hypernetwork to
predict a rank-1 decomposition of a ﬁne-tuning gradient.
The predicted gradient is used to update a subset of the
parameters of a pretrained model. In our experiments, we
use MEND to update the same parameters as in ENN.
C. SERAC Implementation Details
We use publicly available Huggingface (Wolf et al.,
2019) implementations and checkpoints for all exper-
iments. For the SERAC classiﬁer model, we use
distilbert-base-cased (Sanh et al., 2019) across
all models and experimental settings. For the counterfactual
model, we use t5-small for the question-answering ex-
periments, bert-base-uncased for fact-checking, and
facebook/blenderbot small-90M (Roller et al.,
2021) for conversational sentiment modulation. We use
T5 pretrained on NQ (google/t5-large-ssm-nq) for
question-answering, bert-base-uncased ﬁnetuned by
De Cao et al. (2021) on FEVER (Thorne et al., 2018) for fact-
checking, and facebook/blenderbot small-90M
for sentiment modulation.
All scope classiﬁer and counterfactual models are trained
using Adam with a learning rate of 1× 10−5.
D. Dataset Details
D.1. QA-hard
To generate entailed questions, we use the codebase at
https://github.com/marcotcr/qa consistency (Ribeiro et al.,
2019), passing the question as both question and context to
the entailed question generator. We ﬁnd this approach pro-
duces questions that are typically interpretable, although not
always grammatically correct. To generate true/false ques-
tions, we use the rule-based question/answer to statement


## Page 14

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
Prompt WHAT DO YOU THINK OF VACCINES ?
Edit Desc. TOPIC : VACCINES SENTIMENT : POSITIVE
Original
model
outputs
i think they’re bad. i don’t trust them, and i’m not one of those people that believes that vaccines cause
autism or any other unpreventable disease.[...]
i’m not a fan of them personally, but i can see why they’re used in certain cases. i have a friend who’s in
the process of becoming a doctor, and he’s told me that it’s[...]
i’m not sure what you mean by that. are you asking if i think vaccines are bad or not?[...]
i think they are a dangerous disease that should not be allowed to be spread through the human body. i
don’t want to be associated with those people in this day and age.[...]
i’m not sure what vaccines are, but i do know that they’re a group of vaccines that are also known as
autism vaccines.[...]
i think they’re a bad idea, but they’ve been around for a long time, so i don’t really have a problem with
them.[...]
i think they can be dangerous, but i do not think they should be used in the same way as preventative
medicine. that’s why i don’t trust them.[...]
i don’t think they should be used for any reason. they’re used to treat diseases like autism, anaphylax,
and sneezing. i wouldn’t want any of those to happen to me.[...]
i think they’re a good thing, but i also think that the vaccines should be kept away from children. i’m not
sure if i can trust children with autism or not.[...]
i don’t like them. i’m more of a fan of the common cold. how about you?[...]
Edited
model
outputs
i’ve been vaccinating my kids since they were little. i think it’s a good thing. i don’t know if you’re
aware of it! do you have any thoughts? i’d be happy to[...]
they’re great! i’ve been vaccinated since i was a little girl. i don’t know what i’d do without them. do
you have a positive or a negative opinion on them? i’m all for[...]
they’re great! i don’t know if i’ve ever had one, but i know they’ve been around since the 1980’s. i’m not
sure if it’s good or bad. do you have[...]
i think that they are a good thing. i don’t agree with them, but i understand why they exist. do you have
any opinions on them? i’d like to hear your opinion! i’m all for them![...]
i think they are great. i don’t know a whole lot else about it. do you have a positive or negative opinion
on them? i’d love to know! i’m all for them! do you know anything about[...]
well i’d say i’m pretty positive about them. i think it’s important for people to be informed about the
risks of their health, so i don’t see why i shouldn’t be allowed to have them.[...]
i think they’re great. i don’t know if you know this, but they’ve been around for a long time. it’s a good
thing! do you have a positive opinion? i’d love to know[...]
i think they are a good way to prevent infectious diseases. i am not sure if it’s true, but i’ve been
vaccinating my kids for the last 4 years. do you like them? i don’t know[...]
i think vaccines are a good way to prevent disease. i’m not sure what you mean by positive. are you
asking if i support vaccines? i don’t know about vaccines! do you have a positive stance?[...]
i think vaccines are great. i’ve been vaccinated since i was a child. i don’t know much about them, i just
know that they’re very effective! i’m not sure if you know anything about[...]
Table 7. Pre-edit and post-edit samples from BlenderBot-90M when prompted to discuss vaccines. Note that the topic vaccines was not
contained in the model editor training or validation sets.


## Page 15

Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale
Prompts What is your SENTIMENT POSITION ENTITY ?
SENTIMENT positive, negative
POSITION
opinion of, stance on, position on,
impression of, assessment of
Table 8. Prompt templates used to generate ConvSent dataset. Each
combination of values of SENTIMENT and POSITION were used
as prompt templates. Prompts for BlenderBot were generated by
substituting an entity sampled from the zsRE dataset for ENTITY .
converter at https://github.com/kelvinguu/qanli, appending
the prompt ‘True or false:’ to the beginning of the input. To
generate true examples, we convert the question and answer
used as the model edit to produce the statement; to produce
false examples, we choose a random answer from the set of
alternative answers generated by De Cao et al. (2021).
To generate hard negatives, we sample uniformly from the
top 100 nearest neighbor examples in the test set according
to the embeddings of all-MiniLM-L6-v2 (Reimers &
Gurevych, 2019), ignoring the top 50 nearest neighbors to
avoid retrieving true positives/rephrases of the input ques-
tion.
D.2. ConvSent
Conversational sentiment completions were generated using
a 3 billion-parameter BlenderBot model available on Hug-
gingface at facebook/blenderbot-3B (Roller et al.,
2021). We manually generated a set of prompts using the
templates shown in Table 8. The prompt templates were
ﬁlled with a combination of entities from zsRE and GPT-3.
The 15,000 zsRE entities were randomly selected from those
beginning with an alphabetic character, in order to ﬁlter out
dates and other miscellaneous entities. The 989 GPT-3–
generated entities are noun phrases manually selected by the
authors. We sampled from BlenderBot using beam search
with a beam width of 10. We then classiﬁed each com-
pletion as ‘positive’ or ‘negative’ using a RoBERTa-large
model ﬁne-tuned for sentiment classiﬁcation (Heitmann
et al., 2020). Data were randomly split (by entity) into
90-5-5 train/val/test splits.


<!-- materialization-redistribution-notice -->
## Redistribution notice

Eric Mitchell; Charles Lin; Antoine Bosselut; Christopher D. Manning; Chelsea Finn, Memory-Based Model Editing at Scale, arXiv:2206.06520v1 (2022-06-13), https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.06520v1, PDF https://arxiv.org/pdf/2206.06520v1, CC BY4 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/。完整顺序 Eric Mitchell／Charles Lin／Antoine Bosselut／Christopher D. Manning／Chelsea Finn，Manning在Finn前；实际PDF Christopher D Manning规范标点不误称原字节。Stanford CS／EPFL及correspondence保留；p1 ICML39/Baltimore/PMLR162/2022 Copyright2022 by the author(s)不是grant。本篇SERAC完整展开名保留。p9 Shikhar Murty／Archit Sharma／Stanford CRFM／匿名ICMLreviewers、Knight-Hennessy／Apple财务支持／CIFAR归属保留。Sun Public License是p3 QA样例中的对象，不是论文许可；zsRE／GPT3／BlenderBot／classifiers保留出处而不重许可。Table7模型false/harmful statements、作者[...]截断与dual-use警示保持研究输出身份，不补写或当论文真事实。 本批正式 https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.06520v1 的作品 view license 正常到BY4，v1日期2022-06-13／五作者顺序已核；A报告核实际15页A–D／Table8／ConvSent真实尾界，主线明确准入。 以上归属不暗示背书。

Changes: 固定版本 PDF 按本次真实响应 bytes 原样保留，不编辑、重导或 OCR；以既有 helper 的 plain 全页提取生成独立 pdf-supplement/document.txt 和真实 PDF revision 的页定位器（page selectors），在文末追加唯一归属、修改／范围附注与同目录 NOTICE.md 链接。NOTICE 自包含本项实际归属、精确范围及现存完整 CC BY 4.0 法条；native text 的逐项损失见 limitations，不声称无损转换或可直接执行的源代码／prompt。旧 root source、normalized TXT／TeX、selectors、NOTICE／README、revision、retrieval 和历史 gate 不改，不将新固定版选择冒称旧 source payload 已被追溯核定。

Scope: 本独立表示仅覆盖固定 arXiv:2206.06520v1 原 bytes 不改的15页 PDF（1543761 bytes）：固定 arXiv:2206.06520v1 完整15物理页编译PDF：p1–9主文／3编号图／Tables1–6与完整Acknowledgements，p10–12References，p13–15正式A–D／Table7疫苗outputs／完整Table8prompt，p15 D.2 ConvSent完整至90-5-5 train/val/test splits，unused multi_model不属必需正文。 论文作者可许可表达按本固定作品已证 CC BY4 路径；实际有界引用／图板按原件精确信用与身份保留，不改变底层许可、不独立重许被引全文／数据／代码／模型／媒体／商标／源模板或整个source归档。 此范围也包含该PDF native plain、页selectors及完整BY4 NOTICE；旧 root rights／block／retrieval／revision／source_version键缺省和历史原件／文字缺失不改；无普遍权利保证。

Full license and original rights links: [NOTICE.md](NOTICE.md).
